Playwrights write scripts for theatrical productions. They come up with a concept, write lines for actors to say, produce stage direction for actors to follow, and suggest ideas for theatrical set design.
Education Required
A bachelors degree is typically needed for a full-time job as a writer. Because writing skills are essential in this occupation, many employers prefer candidates with a degree in English, journalism, or communications.
Training Required
Writers and authors typically need to gain writing experience through on-the-job training. They may practice writing and work with more experienced writers and editors before their work is ready for publication.
Job Outlook
The projected percent change in employment from 2016 to 2026: 8% (As fast as average)
(The average growth rate for all occupations is 7 percent.)
Advancement
Beginning writers and authors can get a start and put their name on work immediately by writing for small businesses, local newspapers, advertising agencies, and nonprofit organizations. However, opportunities for advancement within these organizations may be limited because they usually do not have enough regular work.
Licenses/Certifications
Some associations offer certifications for writers and authors. Certification can demonstrate competence and professionalism, making candidates more attractive to employers. For example, the American Grant Writers Association (AGWA) offers the Certified Grant Writer credential.
Median pay: How much do Writers and Authors make?
$61,240 Annual Salary
$29.44 per hour

playwites

they write the scripts for threather produtions, they also write for what the actor has to say and the directions for where the actors are to be, and they help with ideas for set design. 
they need a bachelors degree for a full-time job as a writer, and writing skills are needed for a playwrite, and the employer will prefer people with a degree in english, journalism or communications, for training they typically go throught on-the-job training, and they may practice writing with more experienced writers and editors befor they are ready for they'er work to be published.
beginning writers and authors can get there name out there by writing for small businesses, local newspapers, advertision agencies, and nonprofit organizatoins, but for advancement with there work within these organizations may be limited for they do no have enough regular work.
for pay they nomaly make $61,240 annual and about $29.44 per hour.
